feature: S3C-2773 object lock design document (#2467)
scality/cloudserver: docs/design/object-locking.md

# Object Locking using S3 Object Lock

> Object locking feature is built for addressing use cases where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Object locking is a feature built for addressing use cases in which the
```

Write Once Read Many (WORM) model is required. The feature will be built in line

> with AWS specification, any extensions to the specification will be explicitly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the AWS specification. Any extensions to the specification will be explicitly
```

documented. The feature implementation has the goal of meeting
SEC 17a-4 compliance.

## Requirements

> * Bucket needs to have object lock flag set during bucket creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Object lock flag must be set during bucket creation
```

> * Versioning has to be enabled on the bucket

Reviewer: ~~not sure if this is the place for it, but we should mention that if the object lock flag is set, versioning will automatically be enabled on the bucket on creation~~

found it at the bottom :)

> * Lock configuration can be written only on a bucket using PUT Object Lock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Object lock must be enabled on a bucket in order to write a lock configuration using the PUT Object Lock API
```

  Configuration api that has object lock flag set

> PS: AWS specification does not have a way of setting object lock on existing

Reviewer: The AWS spec....
Also would it be beneficial to mention that there is a way to set object lock on existing buckets using the `--token` flag, but that we're going to deviate by using a script?

Author: Agreed

Author: Added a section for deviation in spec.

buckets cannot have object lock flag set through the api. To enable
object lock flag on an existing bucket, a migration needs to be performed

> on the bucket using a tool. Objects that were created before the lock is set

Reviewer: I think this last sentence should be its own note or PS. And it should read ...`before the lock configuration is set...`
```suggestion
on the bucket using a tool. Objects that were created before the lock configuration is set
```

Author: Done

are not protected by Object Locking

## What happens when an object is locked

> A lock when set on an object version prevents deletes, overwrites on that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When set on an object version, a lock prevents deletes and overwrites on that
```

> version until the lock expires. The lock however doesn't prevent creation of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version until the lock expires. However, the lock doesn't prevent creation of
```

delete markers or new versions on top of the locked version.

> Object locking is also immune to Lifecycle actions i.e a lifecycle expiry rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Object locking is also immune to Lifecycle actions i.e a Lifecycle expiry rule
```

cannot delete an object version until the lock on the object expires.

## Controlling locking of an object

> S3 provides a few ways thorough which locking configuration of an object can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
S3 provides a few ways through which the lock configuration of an object can
```

be set

### Retention Modes

> Both Governance and Compliance modes retain lock on an object until the set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Governance and Compliance modes retain the lock on an object until the set
```

> retention period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retention period expires.
```

#### Governance mode

In addition to preventing deletions on an object version by users,

> `GOVERNANCE` mode allows delegating a permission to certain users so that they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GOVERNANCE` mode allows delegating permission to certain users to override
```

> can override the lock settings, for example changing the retention mode, period

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the lock settings, for example by changing the retention mode, period
```

or deleting the object altogether.
Either the root (account) or a user with `s3:BypassGovernanceRetention`
permission can send a delete request with
`x-amz-bypass-governance-retention:true` header to override and delete the
object.

#### Compliance mode

When a lock is placed on an object using `COMPLIANCE` mode, the object version
cannot be deleted by any user until the retention period expires.
This includes root user (account credentials) in the account and no other user
can be given permission either to override the settings or delete the version.

### Retention Period

> Retention period defines the term until when the object is protected from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retention period defines the term during which the object is protected from
```

deletes.

> Retention period can be set on bucket level, which acts as a default for all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retention period can be set on the bucket level, which acts as a default for all
```

objects put in the bucket after the setting is applied. The default retention

> period set on a bucket can be overriden on the object level by setting the date

Reviewer: ```suggestion
period set on a bucket can be overridden on the object level by setting the date
```

and time using the header `x-amz-object-lock-retain-until-date`.

**Buckets** -  retention period can be set in either `days` or `years`, but not
both at the same time.

**Objects** - retention period can be set as date and time when the object is
expected to expire.

### Legal Hold

Legal hold can be enabled on an object version. Once a legal hold is enabled,
regardless of the object's retention date or retention mode, the object version
cannot be deleted until the legal hold is removed.
Legal hold can be set on an object version during PUT Object request by setting

> `x-amz-object-lock-legal-hold` header or using PUT Object Legal Hold api

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`x-amz-object-lock-legal-hold` header or using PUT Object Legal Hold API
```

request.

> Root users with account credentials or IAM users who are given the permission

Reviewer: ....given permission...

`s3:PutObjectLegalHold` are allowed to set Legal hold on an object version.

### Implementation

#### Storing Object lock configuration

Object lock can be enabled on a bucket during bucket creation using
`x-amz-bucket-object-lock-enabled` header. This is stored along with the

> bucket's metadata defined in BucketInfo model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bucket's metadata defined in the BucketInfo model.
```

Any default lock settings (governance/compliance mode, days/years for retention

> period) defined using `PutObjectLockConfiguration` request are stored along

Reviewer: ```suggestion
period) defined using `PutObjectLockConfiguration` request are stored
```

> with the Bucket's metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as part of the bucket metadata.
```

When a PUT Object request is received, the lock configuration is evaluated and

> retain until date and time is calculated and set as `retain-until-date`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the lock expiration date and time is calculated and set as `retain-until-date`
```

property on the object's metadata.

> Lock configuration on a PUT object request is evaluated the following order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lock configurations on a PUT object request is evaluated the following order:
```

But what do you mean by them being evaluated on a PUT object request? Like if the object is going to be overwritten?

Author: You can set a lock on a object during the PUT Object request by setting headers like `x-amz-object-lock-retain-until-date` etc.

Reviewer: Yeah, I didn't realize that a lock configuration could be set on a regular put

1. Bucket's configuration for retention mode/period

> 2. Object's configuration in the PUT Object for retention mode/period

Reviewer: PUT Object Retention?

Author: I meant lock configuration that can be set on a PUT object request for example with header `x-amz-object-lock-retain-until-date`

The object's settings override the bucket's settings when calculating the
`retain-until-date` date and time to be stored on the object's metadata.

> Lock configuration on an object version can also be changed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lock configuration on an object version can also be changed using
```

> `PutObjectRetention` api request, when the object has no prior retention mode

Reviewer 2: API

set or if the object has `GOVERNANCE` mode set and the user has appropriate
permission to make the request.

Note: Delete markers do not have any object lock protection

#### Processing DELETE requests

> Whenever requests such as  DELETE object using version-id,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever requests such as DELETE object using version-id,
```

Multi-Object DELETE specifying version-id or a Lifecycle action to
permanently delete the object version are received, the current date and time is

> evaluated against `retain-until-date` set on the object and the client will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
evaluated against the `retain-until-date` set on the object and the client will
```

> receive `Access Denied` error if the current date and time is less than the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
receive an `Access Denied` error if the current date and time is less than the
```

`retain-until-date` set on the object.
When the current date and time exceeds the `retain-until-date`, deletes on the
object version are automatically allowed. There is no cleanup action to remove
the `retain-until-date` set on the object version's metadata once the
`retain-until-date` expires.
DELETE object requests without a version id result in creation of delete markers

> on top of the object version, even if the object has a lock configuration is set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on top of the object version, even if the object has a lock configuration set
```

and the `retain-until-date` is current.

> 

Reviewer 3: What is the Lifecycle supposed to do when receiving 'Access Denied' ? Shall it ignore ? maintain metrics ?

Author: It needs to be tested but I think Lifecycle currently ignores. Maintaining metrics would make sense but I am not sure how LIfecycle can figure out if the Access Denied came because of lock or not.

#### Lifecycle actions

> Lifecycle jobs can create delete markers on the object but cannot delete an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lifecycle jobs can create delete markers on the object but cannot permanently delete an
```

> object version permanently that is locked until the lock expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
object version that is locked until the lock expires.
```

#### Replication

> Lock configuration on the object version in a source bucket is copied over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lock configuration on the object version in a source bucket is copied over
```

to the destination bucket only if object lock is enabled on the destination

> bucket, otherwise the lock is ignored in the destination bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bucket. Otherwise, the lock is ignored in the destination bucket.
```

## APIs covering S3 Object lock

> * **Put Bucket** - extend bucket creation api to include configuration for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Put Bucket** - extend the bucket creation API to include configuration for
```

  enabling object lock on the bucket

  **Note:** Versioning is automatically enabled on buckets that have object lock

>   enabled as part of PUT Bucket request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  enabled as part of a PUT Bucket request
```

> * **PUT Object** - extend put object api to parse `x-amz-object-lock-mode`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Put Object** - extend put object API to parse `x-amz-object-lock-mode`,
```

  `x-amz-object-lock-retain-until-date`, `x-amz-object-lock-legal-hold`
  headers and store the configuration on an object.

> * **COPY Object** - extend the api to accept the similar lock configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Copy Object** - extend the API to accept the same lock configuration
```

  headers as the PUT Object request

> * **Create Multipart Upload** - extend the api to accept the similar lock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Create Multipart Upload** - extend the API to accept the same lock
```

  configuration headers as the PUT Object request

* **Put Object Lock Configuration** - allows setting a default lock
  configuration for objects that are going to be stored in the bucket. This
  request is accepted only on buckets that have object lock enabled.

> * **Get Object Lock Configuration** - GET the object lock configuration set on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Get Object Lock Configuration** - gets the object lock configuration set on
```

  the bucket metadata

> * **Put Object Retention** - sets retention mode/period configuration on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Put Object Retention** - sets the retention mode/period configuration on a
```

  object version

> * **Get Object Retention**- get retention mode/period configuration set on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Get Object Retention**- gets the retention mode/period configuration set on a
```

  object version

> 

Reviewer 3: Are we supposed to maintain UTAPI metrics ?
Are we supposed to maintain statistics counters for monitoring attempts to delete a lock (security monitoring) ?

Author: We will include hooks to Utapi but beyond that I don't think Utapi bodes well for audit trail. We have another feature competing in S3C for Audit trail and I think it's best to introduce it there.

> 

Reviewer: Missing Put/Get Object Legal Hold APIs

## FAQ

1. Q: What error code does the client get when a delete version request is sent on
   a locked object?

   A: Access Denied

2. Q: Can an object set with GOVERNANCE retention mode be deleted with acccount
   credentials?

   A: Yes, if the delete object request is sent is along with
   `x-amz-bypass-governance-retention:true` header. This header needs to be
   explicitly set and is disabled by default on all AWS SDKs and AWS CLI.

> 3. Q: Does placing lock on an object version generate a new version?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Q: Does placing a lock on an object version generate a new version?
```

permanently delete the object version are received, the current date and time is
evaluated against the `retain-until-date` set on the object and the client will
receive an `Access Denied` error if the current date and time is less than the
`retain-until-date` set on the object.
When the current date and time exceeds the `retain-until-date`, deletes on the
object version are automatically allowed. There is no cleanup action to remove
the `retain-until-date` set on the object version's metadata once the
`retain-until-date` expires.
DELETE object requests without a version id result in creation of delete markers
on top of the object version, even if the object has a lock configuration set
and the `retain-until-date` is current.

#### Lifecycle actions

Lifecycle jobs can create delete markers on the object but cannot permanently
delete an object version that is locked until the lock expires.

#### Replication

The lock configuration on the object version in a source bucket is copied over
to the destination bucket only if object lock is enabled on the destination
bucket. Otherwise, the lock is ignored in the destination bucket.

> ## APIs covering S3 Object lock

Reviewer 2: Can we add `Get Object` as well? 

When we have object lock configuration on an object, AWS Get Object request returns ObjectLockMode and ObjectLockRetainUntilDate properties; sample response: 
```
{
    "AcceptRanges": "bytes",
    "LastModified": "2020-05-14T03:59:59+00:00",
    "ContentLength": 2248,
    "ETag": "\"03dfecec5e65f5cacc56bfe6a6fd07d6\"",
    "VersionId": "f0lAvcTBiDKHgqZDpdkAlAoDFG9S0N38",
    "ContentType": "binary/octet-stream",
    "Metadata": {},
    "ObjectLockMode": "GOVERNANCE",
    "ObjectLockRetainUntilDate": "2020-05-15T03:59:58.451000+00:00"
}
```

  headers as the PUT Object request

* **Create Multipart Upload** - extend the API to accept the same lock
  configuration headers as the PUT Object request

* **Put Object Lock Configuration** - allows setting a default lock
  configuration for objects that are going to be stored in the bucket. This
  request is accepted only on buckets that have object lock enabled.

* **Get Object Lock Configuration** - gets the object lock configuration set on
  the bucket metadata

* **Put Object Retention** - sets the retention mode/period configuration on a
  object version

* **Get Object Retention** - gets the retention mode/period configuration set
  on a object version

* **Put Object Legal Hold** - sets legal hold configuration on an object version

* **Get Object Legal Hold** - gets the legal hold status for an object version

## Deviations

The following hightlights any deviation from AWS implementation of the feature

- `token`

  AWS allows setting object lock on existing buckets by asking the user to
  contact support, the support then gives a `token` that can be used to set lock
  on the specific bucket. Cloudserver's implementation differs in the way that

>   we will use a tool to enable object lock by modifying the bucket's configuration

Reviewer 2: What kind of a tool does this referring to, is there any code change that needs to be done to allow setting object lock on an existing bucket? (based on our current implementation we're returning `Object Lock configuration cannot be enabled on existing buckets`)

Reviewer 2: @rahulreddy for visibility

Author: @ilkescality  Yes, I will add more info on the tool. It can be a node.js script in s3utils that allows TS to bypass the S3API and set the object lock flag on buckets.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.
